add notes for WASI-09-21 (#1376)
WebAssembly/meetings: wasi/2023/WASI-09-21.md

Colin Murphy
Piotr Sikora
Luke Wagner
Chris Woods
Dave Bakker
Petr Penzin
Kate Goldenring
Colin Murphy
Sam Clegg
Matthew Yacobucci
Steven Prine
Ivan Font

#### Vote: Advance wasi-http proposal to Phase 2

**Pat Hickey:** We are essentially voting on the compatibility criteria of wasi-http proposal

**Pat Hickey:** https://github.com/webassembly/wasi-http#phase-4-advancement-criteria

**Pat Hickey:** Luke now one of the champions of wasi-http. He has been very involved since day zero. He has added the set of compatibility criteria. Must have two complete independent implementations. One of the rules of the implementations is that it must execute in the browser using fetch. This means wasi-http will work both in the web and on the server. Traditionally everyone working on wasi-http has been working on the non-browser implementations first. We are making wasi-http working in the browser a requirement.

**Pat Hickey:** The Fetch API is the way you do modern http requests. The Fetch API does not implement trailers today. We will have to cover this in the spec to cover this implementation detail. Does anyone have anything to add?

**Pat Hickey:** Any questions or concerns?

> **Petr Penzin**: I like that this is required to be implemented using `fetch`. Generally how does this compare to fetch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Petr Penzin**: I like that this is required to be compatible with the Web API. How does it compare to the Web version, though?
```

**Pat Hickey:** No, specific to wasi-http. We think this is appropriate for wasi-http since fetch API exists and so it makes it desirable. Sockets for instance, there will never be a requirement for it to work on the web, there will never be a way to make it work on the web. 

**Piotr Sikora**: What about WebTransport and/or WebSockets?

**Pat Hickey:** Exposing web transport would be very interesting.

**Piotr Sikora**: It could also lead to partitioning of the WASI worlds. We want to create the HTTP proxy world and that requirement may conflict with the needs of browsers. 

**Pat Hickey**:  We expect that the http-proxy world is the thing that will work in browsers. Sockets is very intentionally not part of this world. One world we’ve tossed around conversationally is a caching http proxy store. When in a serverless environment, you could have more sharing of that cache.

**Till**: @Piotr Sikora part of the stage 2 entrance criteria is defining stage 4 criteria, so it's not purely up to the proposal champions. Instead, the WASI SG has to assess the validity of those criteria in deciding whether the proposal should advance to stage 2

> **Petr Penzin**: Easier to see which parts of the web are mappable and which are not. Since WASI does not make this a hard requirement. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Petr Penzin**: If there was a requirement to consider Web mapping, it would be easier to see which parts of the web are mappable and which are not. Though that might not make sense for some proposals. 
```

**Pat Hickey:** Let’s do one big vote. We can do this all grouped as one vote as long everyone is onboard for doing it all at once. Let’s talk about it in the future as this gets closer. 

**Pat Hickey:** Stretch goal Nov 30, Dec 14 is the last regular meeting of the year. This is our goal right now.

**Pat Hickey:** Speak up at any time if you see any concerns. We prefer unanimous consent. If you think something isn’t worthy of Preview 2, bring it up.

**Pat Hickey:** Dan Gohman has been doing a phenomenal job bringing forward resources. Many others contributed to the tooling as well. Thank you everyone who has also been contributing to the resources tooling.

**Pat Hickey:** Implementations are ongoing but we are no longer seeing major changes. Mostly smaller details that are being fleshed out in several proposals. Please be involved and understanding how this will impact you and your platform. The early we can talk about that, the better it is for everyone.

**Pat Hickey:** Preview 2 is not our end goal. It is our ticket to keep working on this. We have to ship preview to be in the hands of our customers and be stable code that we can start building on it.

> **Petr Penzin**: On one-hand, let’s vote all at once. The vote from unanimous consent is a little different from what the CG does. The fact that we will move all of the proposals all at once. It is difficult to move everything all at once. Very different from what I’m used to doing within the W3C. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Petr Penzin**: Two concerns. The vote from unanimous consent is a different from what the CG does, where lack of interest can also preclude a proposal from advancing. Moving multiple proposals at once by consent is even more so. 
```

**Pat Hickey:** Vote early and often advice should help cover this.

**Luke Wagner**: We have to be individually happy with each of these proposals to phase 3, then we will vote on a snapshot of the collection of these.

**Bailey Hayes**: (chat) Several recent Wasm CG groups votes have been unanimous consent.

**Piotr Sikora**: The goal stated in the slides was to vote everything at once to phase 3. 

**Pat Hickey:** That was my goal. We can phase 3 vote ahead of time if necessary. It’s a lot of procedural votes and was hoping to reduce that. The proposals are very interrelated. Many of these like streams impact http and files. Many of the lower-level proposals were influenced by learning from the implementation.

> **Petr Penzin**: Now we as a WASI Subgroup we now we need to go around and move this all at once. It’s a very different dynamic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Petr Penzin**: In CG proposal champions make the case to the group to move it forward, here we are going to get a very different dynamic, when WASI Subgroup would itself move all proposals at once, unless there are objections.
```

**Petr Penzin**: I actually have another question. You are using wasmtime and JCO transpile. One objection to this is that JCO is not really a runtime. JCO is a compatibility layer. Implementing something like that is different from having two different WebAssembly engines.

**Pat Hickey:** The goal of a component runtime is to be able to run a component. Being able to run in a browser engine and in wasmtime means we were able to ship without needing native support. If the goal is only to be able to run it, then if we can run it. 

**Petr Penzin**: wasm2c is not considered an engine.

**Pat Hickey:** wasm2c is not a Web engine. The core wasm cg has a requirement for two Web engines, but the WASI subgroup does not use that requirement because we are concerned with use cases beyond just the Web.

**Petr Penzin**: If you have two transpilers, then you could move it forward right?

**Pat Hickey:** Yes

**Luke Wagner**: If it is part of the portability requirements for the proposal as in those are the goals where that proposals needs to run, then yes.

> **Piotr Sikora**: Concern of underspecified specification since JCO and wasmtime are primarily developed by Fastly.

Reviewer: @PiotrSikora I thought you asked if the two implementations were actually independent? Though this wording might be equivalent.

Reviewer 2: Yes, that was my question, and I think this summary is mostly equivalent, but I agree that the intent behind it might not be clear to someone who didn't participate in the meeting. Perhaps this is better?

```suggestion
**Piotr Sikora**: Concern of underspecified specification since both "independent" implementations (JCO and Wasmtime) are primarily developed by Fastly.
```

Also, I've just realized that @tschneidereit's answer is about Wasmtime as a whole and not specifically about WASI in Wasmtime, but it's not like we're not going to block preview 2 on a truly independent implementation.

Reviewer 3: It's true that I talked about Wasmtime and JCO overall, and that for the WASI implementations Fastly is doing a larger share of the work on both. The key point holds though: they are developed by pretty separate sets of people, and with completely different approaches to the implementation, so they should very well serve the purpose of vetting independent implementability.

**Till Schneiderit**: Wasmtime has major contributions from 4 different companies. JCO will largely be implemented by Fastly and Fermyon. In total we have 4 different companies involved in the different implementations. If it were the same people on the same team, then I would agree it would not be enough.

> 

Reviewer: I feel like there was a lot more content/discussion, specifically about moving phase 2 WASI proposal to phase 3 in bulk and via consent vote?

Author: Yes, we did discuss that. It looks like the notes didn't capture this. Can you either add a sentence or two summarizing that discussion?

Reviewer 2: Isn't that summarized in lines 164-188?

Reviewer: Thanks, I got the chronology wrong, I thought it was after, will expand the comment on line 188
